{{../../markdown_header.txt}}

# Light Rail Facts

* 17 miles, $2.4b (!), 
* projected 26,000 riders per day (update: this number is down to 24,000 per day on GoTriangle's website as of 11/20/2018)
* this would be about 8m riders per year
* for comparison: all of the bus lines in Durham taken together serve 6.3m riders per year (source: FTA)
* hence, the one rail line is supposed to serve more passengers than all of Durham's bus lines combined

[Web site against the rail](https://stopthetrain.org/)

[Notes on ridership estimates](ridership.html)

[Notes on cost per rider](cost.html)

[List of projects currently under consideration for federal funding](https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/grant-programs/capital-investments/current-capital-investment-grant-cig-projects)

* NSE projects compete with DOLRT
* ratings are included in PDF files. As of 11/23/2018, DOLRT is rated medium. All competing projects are rated medium-high.


## Revenue

Charlotte Blue Line charges $2.20 per rider. At the projected 9.5m riders per year, total revenue is $21m. The annual interest cost of the project is $120m.

## Cost Benefit Analysis

[St Louis Fed Report](https://www.stlouisfed.org/publications/central-banker/fall-2004/the-costs-and-benefits-of-light-rail)

* Light rail fares generally cover less than 30% of cost.

A [2010 Berkely Study](https://iurd.berkeley.edu/wp/2010-04.pdf) finds that, without externalities, almost no light rail system is cost effective. For Charlotte, breaking even would require an externality of $8.57 per trip. The only cities that are close to breaking even are large ones (San Francisco, New York).

But this line of argument is a losing proposition. Everybody will just argue that the congestion benefits are worth the budget deficits.

## Charlotte Blue Line

[Wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynx_Blue_Line):

* 19 miles, 26 stations, 17,000 riders per day
* cost: $462m (compared with estimate of $226m)
* extension: 10 miles, cost $1.16b

## Other Concerns

Aside from the general economic viability of the DOLRT, there are concerns about the specific route that GoTriangle has proposed.

1. GoTriangle proposes to build a train maintenance facility in a residential area (at Farrington Road and Ephesus Church Road). This will generate substantial around the clock noise. The facility will store large quantities of toxic and flammable substances across the street from a retirement community and within a quarter mile of an elementary school. There is no evidence that GoTriangle has consulted fire or public health officials about the risks posed by the site. [Details](romf.html)
2. Where the track has to cross existing roads, GoTriangle plans "at grade" crossings for most locations. These will block traffic 150 times a day. They also cause traffic accidents.
3. Objections have been raised by Depac and the American Tobacco Campus that "[Light rail could disrupt downtown Durham](https://indyweek.com/news/durham/gotriangle-light-rail-downtown-durham-DPAC-american-tobacco-campus/)"
4. Duke University has raised concerns that rail tracks could block access to university hospitals.

Finally, there are concerns about the process by which the DOLRT has been promoted to the general public.
GoTriangle has systematically misled the public about some of the adverse consequences of the DOLRT. To provide one example: The noise and vibration study circulated during the public comment period downplayed the noise generated by the proposed maintenance facility (ROMF) which would be located in a residential area. Only after most of its public presentations were completed did GoTriangle release a [supplementary noise and vibration study](https://gotriangle.org/sites/default/files/0637b_rpt_sea-app-j-noise-and-vibration.pdf) (dated October 2018). If a resident wanted to find out about the noise generated by the ROMF, he or she would have to be aware of this study and peruse its Appendix J. It essentially overturns the conclusions of the original study and reveals that the ROMF would generate around the clock noise of 99 dBA and peak noise of 136 dBA (comparable to a jet fighter taking off). During a presentation in November, after the supplementary study was released, GoTriangle representatives still provided incorrect information about the noise. And even this information was provided only in response to audience questions. One representative claimed that the supplementary noise study contained no significant new information.

## Opportunities to comment

NC DOT accepts comments via web form.

* [Division 5 (Durham)](https://apps.ncdot.gov/ContactUS/Home/PostComment?Unit=STIPDiv5)
* [Division 7 (Orange county)](https://apps.ncdot.gov/ContactUS/Home/PostComment?Unit=STIPDiv7)



-----------